---
title: How Does Harper Lee Present the Theme of Courage in ‘To KIll a Mockingbird’ in Chapter 15 and the First 14 Chapters (B Tech Spark Notes)
layout: post
author: alex.crittenden
permalink: /how-does-harper-lee-present-the-theme-of-courage-in-‘to-kill-a-mockingbird’-in-chapter-15-and-the-first-14-chapters-(b-tech-spark-notes)/
source-id: 1-FDTtKrTErGoO-89iqx_oNkFC02TKenwpQqbcaP1glg
published: true
---
**How Does Harper Lee Present the Theme of Courage in 'To KIll a Mockingbird' in Chapter 15 and the First 14 Chapters?**

'To Kill a Mockingbird' is a novel written by Harper Lee. It is set in the mid 1930’s. The main themes are courage and racism. Courage is an important theme, because we follow two children as they grow up and learn life lessons, whilst their dad is a successful, unprejudiced lawyer. In Maycomb, Alabama (where the novel is set), Atticus is frowned upon throughout the racist white community for protecting ‘coloured’ people, just one example of courage in the book. This essay will focus on the examples of courage throughout the book, up until chapter 15. 

At the start of the novel, Jem, Scout and Dill were all curious about Boo Radley, and the house he lived in (if he was still alive, as the children were unsure). Jem was dared by Dill to touch the Radley house. 'Jem threw open the gate and sped to the side of the house, slapped it with his palm and ran back past us, not waiting to see if his foray was successful'. This resembles courage, because the children were unsure what would happen. They had been deluded by stories about Boo Radley all their life, and had always been told not to go anywhere near their house. This also started their curiosity of Boo Radley, which was a theme throughout the first part of the novel.

Mrs Dubose was very courageous when she decided that she wanted to die a free woman - she would stop taking morphine to stop the pain. ''I wanted you to see what real courage is, instead of getting the idea that courage is a man with a gun in his hand.’’ She was courageous, because she was addicted to morphine at the time. Without the morphine, she knew she would die. She knew her days were coming to an end and she didn’t want her life to end artificially, so she stopped taking it. Atticus showed his kids that courage doesn’t necessarily mean fighting with your fists. This is an example of courage, because no one knows what happens after death. 

In Chapter 15, Atticus shows real courage when he goes to protect Tom Robinson, because he suspects a lynch mob will take place. 'We saw Atticus look up from his newspaper. He folded it deliberately, dropped it into his lap, and pushed his hat to the back of his head'. This quotation shows courage, because it shows composure in a difficult situation. There were ten men trying to lynch one man, and Atticus was his sole defender, and yet Atticus still kept calm. However, he could not divert the men without the help of Scout (although she was unaware of it). He also took a lightbulb on a cord to the cell. This could symbolise that he was trying to shine a light on the truth, because he knew the men knew the truth as well, but they were prejudiced unlike Atticus. 

In Chapter 15, Jem shows courage when he refuses to leave once Atticus asks him to. 'We were accustomed to prompt, if not always cheerful acquiescence to Atticus' instructions, but from the way he stood Jem was not thinking of budging’. This shows courage because Jem had never properly defied his father before in the novel, and to do it in front of people took real courage. He wanted to stay so he could protect his father, as he was unsure as to what was going on. The fact he did this in front of strangers shows he is a very courageous character. Atticus was originally worried when this happen, because he understood the situation and didn't want his children involved. ‘A flash of plain fear was going out of his eyes, but returned when Dill and Jem wriggled into the light’. This quotation showcases even more, that Dill was brave to demonstrate courage in front of a situation he didn’t understand. 

To conclude, I think Harper Lee has presented the incident between Jem and Atticus combined as the most courageous moment in the novel from chapters 1-15. This is because Atticus shows bravery to face off against all of those people, and Jem uses courage to defy Atticus for the first time, in a situation he didn't understand. On the other hand, Jem was also brave when he went to touch the Radley house. However, you could argue that Jem was overtaken with curiosity rather than courage in that moment. I think the incident with Mrs Dubose was very courageous on her part, but we don’t see it as important as Atticus, Jem and Scout’s bravery, because she is not the focus of the novel. 

